hello everyone uh particularly my fellow
Canadians as many of you know we lost uh
one of our greatest
citizens very recently Mr Rex Murphy who
who everyone knew I would say perhaps is
Canada's most outstanding
journalist um I had the great privilege
of traveling to New Finland with Rex and
we we filmed a documentary about that
great Province and its history and we're
very pleased to be able to bring you
that documentary as a tribute to Rex in
the aftermath of his passing so I hope
you enjoy watching it as much as I did
making it although I can't see how
that's possible because I really enjoyed
making it I'm really going to miss him
and he was a he was a great
man the past is still truly
alive the past becomes increasingly
valuable to come somewhere here and see
see these Deep Roots and this deep
particularity there's a relief in
it that's akin to the relief of looking
at a great landscape
Vista it's literally and metaphorically
revivifying
[Music]
[Applause]
and action hello everyone I have the
great privilege and honor to be here in
New Finland with Mr Rex Murphy um Rex
was a of mine I would say and of many
Canadians he's one of Canada's Great
journalists will have to close or
something breaks one of the most
recognized and loveed figures in all the
country when newlanders were crawling
out of the shock and misery of the Cod
collapse Fort McMurray was like a rescue
center so we're here in Newland in this
great old part of Canada with a unique
culture born of isolation in many ways
and Rex has kindly agreed to spend a
week showing us around talking to us
about the
culture new finlanders think of New
Finland as a
personality newand has a distinct
personal relationship with newand is it
goes deep well one of the things that's
really striking about meeting people
from New Finland is they're often
extremely tough and extremely funny and
when I reflected on that even prior to
knowing you I thought well this was a
very very isolated place and that meant
that people made their own music and
they made own and then all thear of and
that's part of what we want to shine
light on while being here we're invting
you along on the trip uh we're making
this up in the most professional manner
we can as we go along and uh making it
up you just heard it being made up in
front of your ears go on with your man
all right onward and upward through New
[Music]
Finland this is St John's Harbor and
incidentally it's St John's Harbor on a
sunny day which is one of three since
1497 this is one of the most spectacular
views that we've ever had here uh New
Finland is not number one in the
priority consciousness of the rest of
the world and to explain its Singularity
you have to explain the communities New
Finland is a province of outports and
outport is a key semantic term in the
understanding of New Finland the
outports were where the culture started
the outports were where the fishery was
we're also standing on Signal Hill and
Signal Hill happened to be the site of
the first wireless communication between
the continent of Europe and the
continent of North
America and when the airplane industry
finally got really going in the 30s
Gander was also a Communications Point
all the airlines of the world had to
stop somewhere before if they left
Europe or Asia Gander was the spot so in
many ways New Finland is at the kind of
transaction point either between
modernity even though we're probably the
oldest and in a sense most conservative
Society in North America nonetheless had
Pioneer moments that were in contrast
but and Associated deeply with
communication and that's interestingly
Associated too with the fact that new
finlanders as a culture are masters of
word and wit I remember being down on a
WARF in New Finland and it was it by the
way was a day like this I looked this is
a beautiful beautiful day and three or
four fishermen were next to oh yeah
we're going to pay for this they're not
going to accept Good Fortune is there's
always going to be attacks of pain or
humiliation that follows all right and
where are we off to next I think we'll
go down to the southern Shore all right
we may never return all right thank you
very much sir
[Music]
okaying here
I'm here in the Newland town of Bay
Bulls speaking with Captain Joe O'Brian
and I was just out for two hours on
Captain Joe's boat so why don't we start
with story about how this Enterprise
came to be I would say so myself and my
brother were fishingman with our
father we saw the fishing wasn't looking
so good and we were spending more money
on bait and hooks and fuel than we were
in having value for our fish for our
catch we started helping the university
do a little bit of research on seabirds
and they said you should start taking
people to see seabirds and we took some
people out and we charged them some
money and then it just snowballed from
that huh the people that you hire and
work with they seem pretty damn happy to
be working for you so what are you doing
right do you think handling people is a
very serious business today and
accountability and Human Resources is a
very difficult thing so if you're an
owner and you're sitting there and
you're nitpicking and people are telling
you this and that and they're getting on
with silly talk you become bogged down
right right so so if you give people
autonomy you have freedom you have
freedom to do what you do well and
that's to take care of people
great to meet you man thanks again that
was a great day